has anyone ever given you a shape and
asked you to draw it without taking your
pen
off the paper perhaps when you see
something like this your natural
reaction is to get stuck in and give it
a go
but this can be frustrating you feel
like there should be a way to do it
but you can't be sure hi i'm beth and
today we're going to talk about what
shapes you can draw without taking your
pen
off the paper for some tapes it's pretty
clear that you can draw them in this way
take a square for instance if i put my
pen here and draw like this
we can draw the square no problem shapes
like this that we can draw without
taking our pen off the paper are called
traversible
and we can also see that with this shape
here i could have started from any of
the dots
and i still would have been able to draw
the square
how about this shape if i put my pen
here and draw like this
so i'm not allowed to go back over the
same line twice so
i'm now stuck here so i haven't
successfully drawn this shape but could
i have gone a different route
let's try start off the same so i went
along here
so instead of going up there i could
have gone up here
but then i have to go down here and
again i'm stuck
let's try again starting from the same
point and do something different again
i have to go down here right and then
i'm not going to be able to do
both of these i can just choose one
because i can't go back along
where i've already drawn so again i'm
stuck and haven't successfully drawn
this shape so i'm pretty confident i
can't draw this shape
starting from this point here but what
about if i started from a different
point
well in fact this shape is rotationally
symmetric
so that means that if you imagine
starting at this point
if you actually sort of rotated this
shape
like this then it's actually equivalent
to starting at this point
so if i can't draw this shape starting
from this point i won't be able to draw
it starting from this point either
so it looks like to me that we can't
draw this shape wherever we start from
so i think this shape is not traversable
how about this shape let's dive in and
give it a go
oh it looks like i'm gonna be stuck i
can't do this side as well
so that didn't work let's give it
another go so i'm gonna start from the
same place here
and see if i could have done something
different so let's go along this edge i
missed
before first um where should i go let's
go up here
around here like this
and once again i can't complete it
that's the best i can do um hmm what
about if i try different vertex
let's say we start from here so
let's go up and around like this
oh this is looking good right so i can
draw this shape
so this shape is traversable but i think
i have to be a bit careful because
it looks like i couldn't do it from this
start but i definitely could do it
starting from this start
so possibly we need to be careful about
where we start
so whilst we made some progress using
trial and error i think we can all agree
it's perhaps not the best method to test
if we can draw a shape without taking
our pen
off the paper for instance that last
shape looked like we couldn't draw it at
all
but actually we cared so what's going on
is there a better way to tell if a shape
is
traversable and can we tell beforehand
which dot we should start at or if it
doesn't matter
let's take a brief segue to some
terminology these shapes that we're
drawing are in fact called
graphs graphs are just a bunch of dots
and some lines joining them
the dots on our shapes or graphs are
called vertices
every vertex in a graph has something
called a degree
this is the number of lines sticking out
of the vertex so this vertex has got
three lines coming out of it so it has
degree
three whereas this vertex has one two
three four lines coming out of it so it
has degree four
let's label the degrees of each of the
vertices on our three graphs
does this help our investigation let's
come back to these graphs in a moment as
i want to think about what actually
happens when we trace our pen
along a shape or what we now call a
graph let's pretend we're trying to draw
a general graph
so i don't mind what it looks like in
every drawing attempt we're going to
start
at a vertex or a dot so let's say we're
starting here
then what we do next is we leave it by
going along a line to another vertex
let's say over here
note that by leaving this vertex and
going to another one
we've added one to the degree of this
vertex this vertex now has degree one
now what do we do once we've reached
this vertex well we leave it again and
go to a different vertex so
let's say we're leaving it and going up
to another vertex over here somewhere
so we've gone this direction note by
entering and then
leaving this vertex we add two lines
coming out of this vertex
so this vertex now has degree two
so now we're here let's go to another
vertex on our graph so say we're going
over this way
and note the same thing has happened by
entering and leaving this vertex
we add two to its degree
so we keep doing this every time we
enter and then leave a vertex we're
adding two to its degree
so say next up in our graph we return to
a previous vertex let's say we're going
back to this one
so we've added two here to the degree
and then
we're about to add two to this degree
again so this is going to have degree
four once we leave it let's say we go
over here
we can also return back through our
starting point let's say the next place
on our journey is through this vertex
let's say we come down here how do we
finish up when we're drawing a shape
well
we either end up back at the vertex
where we started
like in our square example we ended up
back where we started
or we end up at a different vertex that
happened in our third example
so first let's consider the case where
we've almost finished drawing our shape
and to finish it we need to end up back
where we started
so we're doing our final line over here
and we're finished drawing our shape by
ending up back where we started
now let's think about the total degree
of each vertex in this graph
this starting vertex has degree four
this one's got degree one two three four
drawn a three there we go four
uh this one's got degree two
and actually we notice they're all even
degrees we haven't had
any odd degrees on our journey now let's
think does this make sense
let's ignore the starting vertex for a
moment every other vertex
every time we go in and out of it we add
two to the degree
two plus two plus two however many times
is always going to be even
now what about this starting vertex well
it started off with odd degree it
started off with degree
one but then every time we entered and
left it
we added two to its degree so here we
added two by going in and out of it
so currently we're on one plus two and
then we can keep entering and leaving
the vertex
a plus t plus t plus t so on but then at
the very end we come back to where we
started so that adds
one again to the degree of this starting
vertex and so that will give us an even
number always
furthermore we can see that in this case
where we end up back where we started
we've sort of formed like a giant loop
of this graph so we could keep repeating
and repeating drawing this graph
over and over again because we end up
back where we started
and that actually also means we could
start from any vertex
and be able to draw this graph following
the same directions
so for instance we could start from this
vertex and if we followed the arrows
we would end up back where we started
here and we'd still be able to draw the
graph
so we've learned a lot of things here
we've learned that if we can draw a
graph
and we end up back where we started then
all the degrees
of the graph have to be even and also it
doesn't matter what vertex we start from
we can start anywhere so this is our
case one where we end up back where we
started
how about the case where we finish at a
different vertex to the one we started
at
let's get to where we were before we
drew the final line ending up back where
we started
so now in this case we're here at our
penultimate vertex
let's see what happens if we end up at a
different vertex to the one we started
at
so we're going to finish our drawing by
going up here
let's label the degrees of the vertices
on this graph
so we can see we've got two odd degree
vertices
and the rest are even does this make
sense
well yes it does because these are the
two vertices we started and finished at
so when we started up this vertex we
added one to the degree by leaving it
every time we passed through it on our
way we add
two so we added two when we went through
it like this and then
unlike before we don't finish at it so
we don't have that adding one at the end
so the degree of this vertex is going to
be an odd number
similarly for here this vertex starts
off with
degree zero and then when we enter and
leave it on our journey
we add two to the vertex each time and
then we add one at the very end when we
finish up at it
so again this is going to have an odd
degree whereas all the other vertices
every time we pass through it we're
adding two because we're always entering
and then leaving it again
so it makes sense these two vertices
will always have odd degree whilst the
rest will have even degree
so in this graph we started at this
vertex and ended up here
we could have also done the same trail
backwards we could have started here
and ended up there could we have started
at a different vertex like this one
well actually if we do that we're gonna
get stuck at one of these odd degree
vertices
if we're here and we try and draw this
say the first time we pass through this
vertex we're using up two of its three
edges coming out of it
say this one and this one then
the next time we enter this vertex we've
got to go
we're trying to draw the full graph so
we're going to have to draw this edge at
some point
when we come into this vertex we're
going to be trapped because we can't go
over
over any lines so we're going to be
stuck here
so we have to start and finish at the
odd vertices
so what we've shown here is that in
order for it to be possible that we can
draw a graph
or for a graph to be traversable we need
either
every vertex to have even degree or for
exactly two vertices to have odd degree
it turns out that if this is the case we
will always be able to draw the graph
this is called euler's theorem so in
order for a graph to be
traversable we need that either none of
the vertices have odd degree
in which case we can start from any
vertex and we'll end up back where we
started and this is called an eulerian
cycle or we need that there are exactly
two vertices of odd degree in which case
we can start from either odd vertex
and we'll end up at the other vertex of
odd degree and this is called an
eulerian trail
let's have a look at our first graph to
see if this makes sense in this square
graph
we had every vertex of even degree so by
euler's theorem
we know that we can traverse the graph
and also that we can start from anywhere
so that confirms what we've found with
this graph however we've got four
vertices of of degree
now we've said we need either zero or
two vertices to have odd degree to be
able to traverse it
so like we thought we can't draw this
graph
this graph is more interesting we've got
three vertices of even degree
and two of odd degree so this falls into
that category where we've got
exactly two vertices of odd degree so
this graph
we can draw but we have to start at a
vertex of odd degree
and we'll finish up at another vertex of
odd degree
so that explains why we struggle to draw
the graph starting here
but we could draw it when we started
here and i do believe that we
ended up at this vertex so these three
examples confirm what we've found from
our investigation
so if your friend dave gives you this
graph and asks you
if you can draw it without taking your
pen off the paper you can
secretly count the degree of each verse
x find that they're all even
and be like no problem dave i can start
from any vertex and draw it
or if dave gives you this graph and asks
if it's traversable
you can be like why yes it is dave
choose one of these old vertices
start drawing it and you'll end up at
the other odd vertex having been along
all the lines
and then to get your own back on dave
you can create a graph that doesn't have
either zero or two odd vertices
like this this has four odd vertices so
it's not traversable
so there's no chance dave can draw it
without taking his pen off the paper
if you're excited by all this i
recommend you search up the koningsberg
bridge problem
for a real life and historical
application of what we've just found
this brings us to the end of our brief
introduction into the wild world of
graph theory
thanks for watching and see you next
time
you